We present Gelsphere: an Omni-directional rolling vision-based Tectile sensor
for online 3D reconstruction and normal force estimation.
This sensor overcomes the previous sensor's limitations,
such as the inability to perform continuous scanning,
or having only one axis for the scanning direction.
Surface inspection is important in manufacturing and maintenance,
especially for large parts like aircraft skins, pipes, molds, and composite panels.
Vision-based inspection can be fast,
but it is often limited by glare, occlusion,
and curved or confined geometry.
Tactile sensing solves some of these issues
because it measures surface to contact,
but most tactile sensors only capture a small patch at a time,
so scanning large areas become slow
and requires repeated press and lift motion.
Mechanically, gel sphere is inspired by a ball transfer unit.
A layer of miniature steel balls form
a low friction bearing between the sensor gel pad and the housing.
This allows smooth rolling motion
and continuous contact during scanning.
The sensor is entirely self-contained
with a compact camera module with Wi-Fi,
an RGB LED ring, and a battery on a lightweight base.
The internal base is magnetically suspended,
which helps keeps the camera pointed toward the sensing surface
even as the outer gel rolls and changes orientation.
We also integrate a magnetic switch,
so we can turn the sensor on and off without opening the housing.
We build and test the sensor in two different coatings,
specular and matte, and compare their performances.
Here is a real-time reconstruction on a surface.
We estimate frame to frame motion,
align consecutive tactile frames,
and fuse them online to provide immediate feedback during scanning.
Because gel sphere rolls omnidirectionally,
the scan path does not need to follow one fixed axis,
so the sensor can handle curved and irregular trajectories.
After scanning, we run an offline reconstruction,
which allows higher quality stitching and integration.
The result is a stitch surface and a mesh
that covers a much larger area than a single contact frame.
Gel sphere also estimates normal force directly from tactile images.
When force increases, the contact patch grows,
and the deformation pattern changes in a consistent way.
Using synchronized force measurements,
we train a model that maps corresponding tactile image to normal force.
In our data set, the specular coating achieves 0.44 N MAE,
and the matte coating achieves 0.93 N MAE.
This difference shows that specular coding demonstrates higher accuracy,
because higher contrast in textile image
improves both geometry reconstruction and force estimation.
Overall, Gelsphere maintains continuous contact while rolling in any direction.
It supports real-time reconstruction for scanning feedback,
and produces high-quality offline reconstruction after data collection.
It also provides contact force estimation from tactile images.
The Gelsphere can be used in various applications,
can be human operated
or mounted on robotic systems for automated surface scanning.
The potential use can include inspection of large curved structures
or detection of surface defects.